Implement TEME frame in astropy. (#10149)
astropy/astropy: docs/coordinates/satellites.rst

.. include:: references.txt

.. _astropy-coordinates-satellites:

Working with Earth satellites using Astropy Coordinates
*******************************************************

> Satellite data is normally provided in the Two-line element (TLE) format

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Satellite data is normally provided in the Two-Line Element (TLE) format
```

(see `here <https://www.celestrak.com/NORAD/documentation/tle-fmt.php>`_
for a definition). These datasets are designed to be used in combination
with a theory for orbital propagation model to predict the positions
of satellites.

The history of such models is discussed in detail in
`Vallado et al (2006) <https://celestrak.com/publications/AIAA/2006-6753/AIAA-2006-6753-Rev2.pdf>`_
who also provide a reference implementation of the SGP4 orbital propagation
code, designed to be compatible with the TLE sets provided by the United
States Department of Defense, which are available from a source like
`Celestrak <http://celestrak.com/>`_.

The output coordinate frame of the SGP4 model is the True Equator, Mean Equinox
frame (TEME), which is one of the frames built-in to `astropy.coordinates`.

> TEME is an Earth-centered inertial frame (i.e it does not rotate with respect

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TEME is an Earth-centered inertial frame (i.e., it does not rotate with respect
```

> to the stars). Several definitions exist; astropy uses the implementation described

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to the stars). Several definitions exist; ``astropy`` uses the implementation described
```

in `Vallado et al (2006) <https://celestrak.com/publications/AIAA/2006-6753/AIAA-2006-6753-Rev2.pdf>`_.

> Finding ``TEME`` coordinates from TLE data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finding TEME Coordinates from TLE Data
```

==========================================

There is currently no support in `astropy.coordinates` for computing satellite orbits
from TLE orbital element sets. Full support for handling TLE files is available in
the `Skyfield <http://rhodesmill.org/skyfield/>`_ library, but some advice for dealing

> with satellite data in astropy is below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with satellite data in ``astropy`` is below.
```

..
  EXAMPLE START

>   Using sgp4 to get a TEME coordinate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Using SGP4 to Get a TEME Coordinate
```

You will need some external library to compute the position and velocity of the satellite from the

> TLE orbital elements. The `sgp4 <https://pypi.org/project/sgp4/>`_ library can do this. An example

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TLE orbital elements. The `SGP4 <https://pypi.org/project/sgp4/>`_ library can do this. An example
```

> using this library to find the  `~astropy.coordinates.TEME` coordinates of a satellite is::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of using this library to find the  `~astropy.coordinates.TEME` coordinates of a satellite is::
```

.. doctest-requires:: sgp4

        >>> from sgp4.api import Satrec
        >>> from sgp4.api import SGP4_ERRORS
        >>> s = '1 25544U 98067A   19343.69339541  .00001764  00000-0  38792-4 0  9991'
        >>> t = '2 25544  51.6439 211.2001 0007417  17.6667  85.6398 15.50103472202482'
        >>> satellite = Satrec.twoline2rv(s, t)

The ``satellite`` object has a method, ``satellite.sgp4``, that will try to compute the TEME position
and velocity at a given time::

.. doctest-requires:: sgp4

        >>> from astropy.time import Time
        >>> t = Time(2458827.362605, format='jd')
        >>> error_code, teme_p, teme_v = satellite.sgp4(t.jd1, t.jd2)  # in km and km/s
        >>> if error_code != 0:
        ...     raise RuntimeError(SGP4_ERRORS[error_code])

> Now we have the position and velocity in kilometers and kilometers per second, we can create a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that we have the position and velocity in kilometers and kilometers per second, we can create a
```

position in the `~astropy.coordinates.TEME` reference frame::

.. doctest-requires:: sgp4

        >>> from astropy.coordinates import TEME, CartesianDifferential, CartesianRepresentation
        >>> from astropy import units as u
        >>> teme_p = CartesianRepresentation(teme_p*u.km)
        >>> teme_v = CartesianDifferential(teme_v*u.km/u.s)
        >>> teme = TEME(teme_p.with_differentials(teme_v), obstime=t)

Note how we are careful to set the observed time of the `~astropy.coordinates.TEME` frame to
the time at which we calculated satellite position.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

.. EXAMPLE END

```

> Transforming ``TEME`` to other coordinate systems

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Transforming TEME to Other Coordinate Systems
```

==================================================

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

.. EXAMPLE START: Transforming TEME to Other Coordinate Systems

```

Author: I sorted out the example in a separate commit, rather than have two different commits.

> Once you have satellite positions in `~astropy.coordinates.TEME` coordinates they can be easily transformed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you have satellite positions in `~astropy.coordinates.TEME` coordinates they can be transformed
```

into any `astropy.coordinates` frame.

> For example, to find the overhead latitude, longitude and height of the satellite::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, to find the overhead latitude, longitude, and height of the satellite::
```

Note how we are careful to set the observed time of the `~astropy.coordinates.TEME` frame to
the time at which we calculated satellite position.

Transforming TEME to Other Coordinate Systems
==================================================

Once you have satellite positions in `~astropy.coordinates.TEME` coordinates they can be transformed
into any `astropy.coordinates` frame.

For example, to find the overhead latitude, longitude, and height of the satellite::

.. EXAMPLE START Transforming TEME

.. doctest-requires:: sgp4

        >>> from astropy.coordinates import ITRS
        >>> itrs = teme.transform_to(ITRS(obstime=t))  # doctest: +REMOTE_DATA
        >>> location = itrs.earth_location  # doctest: +REMOTE_DATA
        >>> location.geodetic  # doctest: +REMOTE_DATA +FLOAT_CMP
        GeodeticLocation(lon=<Longitude 160.34199789 deg>, lat=<Latitude -24.6609379 deg>, height=<Quantity 420.17927591 km>)

Or, if you want to find the altitude and azimuth of the satellite from a particular location::

.. doctest-requires:: sgp4

        >>> from astropy.coordinates import EarthLocation, AltAz
        >>> siding_spring = EarthLocation.of_site('aao')  # doctest: +REMOTE_DATA

>         >>> aa = teme.transform_to(AltAz(obstime=t, location=siding_spring))  # doctest: +REMOTE_DATA

Reviewer 2: my understanding is that the examples should be standalone. So while this may pass the doctests for now, in the long term it have to be fixed.

Author: OK - I've been back and forth on this; no-one seems to know what the right way is!

Reviewer 2: the example directive is not working yet, but when it does, these examples will be extracted to a separate place, part of a gallery. I would be very surprised if they see outside of their directive container, but the infra is still in the works, so I cannot say this for certain.

Reviewer 3: I think it will probably *start* with them needing to be stand-alone, but might expand to have ways to see wider context? But anyway, I think it doesn't need to block this PR

.. include:: references.txt

.. _astropy-coordinates-satellites:

> Working with Earth satellites using Astropy Coordinates
> ************************************************************************

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Working with Earth satellites using Astropy Coordinates
***********************************************************
```

Finding ``TEME`` coordinates from Two-Line-Ephemerides (TLE)
============================================================

There is currently no support in `astropy.coordinates` for computing satellite orbits
from the TLE orbital elements avaiable from a source like `Celestrak <http://celestrak.com/>`_.
Full support for handling TLE files is available in the `Skyfield <http://rhodesmill.org/skyfield/>`_
library, but if you do not wish to install that library, advice for dealing with satellite data in
astropy is below.

..
  EXAMPLE START
  Using spg4 to get a TEME coordinate

You will need some external library to compute the position and velocity of the satellite from the
TLE orbital elements. The `spgp4 <https://pypi.org/project/sgp4/>`_ library can do this. An example
using this library to find the  `~astropy.coordinates.TEME` coordinates of a satellite is::

>         >>> from sgp4.api import Satrec

Reviewer 5: I think you may need some `doctest requires sgp4` or so for this to work. Which also means `sgp4` should be included in the depedencies...

Author: have attempted this now.

        >>> from sgp4.api import SGP4_ERRORS
        >>> s = '1 25544U 98067A   19343.69339541  .00001764  00000-0  38792-4 0  9991'
        >>> t = '2 25544  51.6439 211.2001 0007417  17.6667  85.6398 15.50103472202482'
        >>> satellite = Satrec.twoline2rv(s, t)

The ``satellite`` object has a method, ``satellite.sgp4``, that will try to compute the TEME position
and velocity at a given time::

        >>> from astropy.time import Time
        >>> t = Time(2458827.362605, format='jd')
        >>> error_code, teme_p, teme_v = satellite.sgp4(t.jd1, t.jd2)  # in km and km/s

>         >>> if error_code != 0:

Reviewer 5: Can this happen given this fixed position/time example?

Author: Not really, but I'd like to leave it in to illustrate best practice.

.. include:: references.txt

.. _astropy-coordinates-satellites:

Working with Earth satellites using Astropy Coordinates
*******************************************************

> 

Reviewer 6: If you are feeling up for it, perhaps you could write a few sentences here as an introduction / overview of earth satellite coordinate frame conventions, with some references?

Author: done...

..
  EXAMPLE START
  Using sgp4 to get a TEME coordinate

You will need some external library to compute the position and velocity of the satellite from the
TLE orbital elements. The `sgp4 <https://pypi.org/project/sgp4/>`_ library can do this. An example
using this library to find the  `~astropy.coordinates.TEME` coordinates of a satellite is::

.. doctest-requires:: sgp4

        >>> from sgp4.api import Satrec
        >>> from sgp4.api import SGP4_ERRORS
        >>> s = '1 25544U 98067A   19343.69339541  .00001764  00000-0  38792-4 0  9991'
        >>> t = '2 25544  51.6439 211.2001 0007417  17.6667  85.6398 15.50103472202482'
        >>> satellite = Satrec.twoline2rv(s, t)

The ``satellite`` object has a method, ``satellite.sgp4``, that will try to compute the TEME position
and velocity at a given time::

.. doctest-requires:: sgp4

        >>> from astropy.time import Time
        >>> t = Time(2458827.362605, format='jd')
        >>> error_code, teme_p, teme_v = satellite.sgp4(t.jd1, t.jd2)  # in km and km/s
        >>> if error_code != 0:
        ...     raise RuntimeError(SGP4_ERRORS[error_code])

> Now we have the position and velocity in kilometer and kilometers per second, we can create a

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Now we have the position and velocity in kilometers and kilometers per second, we can create a
```

position in the `~astropy.coordinates.TEME` reference frame::

.. doctest-requires:: sgp4

        >>> from astropy.coordinates import TEME, CartesianDifferential, CartesianRepresentation
        >>> from astropy import units as u

>         >>> teme_v = CartesianDifferential(teme_v*u.km/u.s)
>         >>> teme_p = CartesianRepresentation(*teme_p*u.km, differentials={'s': teme_v})
>         >>> teme = TEME(teme_p, obstime=t)

Reviewer 6: Not critical, but it might be simpler to do:
```suggestion 
        >>> teme_p = CartesianRepresentation(teme_p*u.km)
        >>> teme_v = CartesianDifferential(teme_v*u.km/u.s)
        >>> teme = TEME(teme_p.with_differentials(teme_v), obstime=t)
```

Author: that *is* nicer, thanks.

.. include:: references.txt

.. _astropy-coordinates-satellites:

Working with Earth satellites using Astropy Coordinates
*******************************************************

Finding ``TEME`` coordinates from Two-Line-Ephemerides (TLE)
============================================================

There is currently no support in `astropy.coordinates` for computing satellite orbits
from the TLE orbital elements avaiable from a source like `Celestrak <http://celestrak.com/>`_.
Full support for handling TLE files is available in the `Skyfield <http://rhodesmill.org/skyfield/>`_

> library, but if you do not wish to install that library, advice for dealing with satellite data in
> astropy is below.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
library, but some advice for dealing with satellite data in astropy is below.
```
Suggestion: slightly more neutral phrasing to not make it seem like we're saying there's a concrete reason not to install skyfield.

        >>> s = '1 25544U 98067A   19343.69339541  .00001764  00000-0  38792-4 0  9991'
        >>> t = '2 25544  51.6439 211.2001 0007417  17.6667  85.6398 15.50103472202482'
        >>> satellite = Satrec.twoline2rv(s, t)

The ``satellite`` object has a method, ``satellite.sgp4``, that will try to compute the TEME position
and velocity at a given time::

.. doctest-requires:: sgp4

        >>> from astropy.time import Time
        >>> t = Time(2458827.362605, format='jd')
        >>> error_code, teme_p, teme_v = satellite.sgp4(t.jd1, t.jd2)  # in km and km/s
        >>> if error_code != 0:
        ...     raise RuntimeError(SGP4_ERRORS[error_code])

Now we have the position and velocity in kilometer and kilometers per second, we can create a
position in the `~astropy.coordinates.TEME` reference frame::

.. doctest-requires:: sgp4

        >>> from astropy.coordinates import TEME, CartesianDifferential, CartesianRepresentation
        >>> from astropy import units as u
        >>> teme_v = CartesianDifferential(teme_v*u.km/u.s)
        >>> teme_p = CartesianRepresentation(*teme_p*u.km, differentials={'s': teme_v})
        >>> teme = TEME(teme_p, obstime=t)

> Note how we are careful to set the observed time of the `~astropy.coordinates.TEME` frame to the time at which we calculated

Reviewer 5: Rather long line

Author: fixed.

satellite position.

Transforming ``TEME`` to other coordinate systems
==================================================

Once you have satellite positions in `~astropy.coordinates.TEME` coordinates they can be easily transformed
into any `astropy.coordinates` frame.

>   Transforming to other coordinates

Reviewer 5: Is this meant to have an `.. example` or so??

Author: I wasn't quite sure how the .. example works, so I wrapped all the code in a single example. Largely because each code block depends upon the results from the others. Is this the wrong thing to do?

Reviewer 5: I really just wondered what this sentence here was doing, as it is not a heading.

Author: gotcha. I've removed it now - it was cruft hanging over from when I had each block as it's own example.
